So you have been thinking of ditching Discord? Maybe you have reviewed the options, Matrix, XMPP, maybe some others. 

Maybe the compleixity from Matrix is overwhelming for you to piece together for a working server? Maybe you don't want to configure what many would deem to be unecessary features that Matrix depends on or has set by default? 

Okay, hear me out, Maybe, just maybe,  you, like I, want a quick install where you can sit coffee poured and get to installing the few packages required and making a quick config and tunnel so your buddies can join your messaging server to share MemZ and StuFf ;)

Today comrade, we are introducing 1988 technology in the form of a (still maintained BTW) 2002 project by the name of inspIRCd, or as most call it, IRC. Where we will route and build our very own tunnel within the I2P network, which makes for a truly better alternative to Tor, that is not one big giant honey pot for the CIA/FBI and makes for a better alternative to Matrix for those looking for one of the quicker ways to get a messaging server up and running quickly. 

Hope you got that coffee poured (or whatever you drink of choice)

Lets get into the contents, 

What you will need 

Terminal commands and config: 

"git" (so we can gitclone for building inspircd from source)

"jre-openjdk" (Required for i2p java. As a sidenote, if you play a lot of Minecraft with mods, you may already have this installed :P )

"inspircd" (Our IRC backend, you can either build from source or use the AUR, though word of warning AUR is not secure after numerous malware attacks, this guide will recommend a build from source and I can walk you through the basic setup :) 

"Inspircd.conf" (The install from source includes an example config, "inspircd.example.conf" you can edit this file and rename, but if that's to much for you, I'll leave you the necessary commands which enables inspircd for you. 

Chromium or Firefox (You don't want to proxy into i2p from your main browser that you do banking through, emailing, anything personal of the sorts, etc, so think of this extra browser as an isolated instance from your primary web browser. 

Irssi (IRC Terminal Shell Client for quick testing, you can then use other shells like Hexchat for a less minimal frontend if you so please :)

and lastly,

Web Download: 

i2p (of course, from their official website here.... https://i2p.net/en/downloads/



Start Guide here. (All commands with quotations are assumed to be entered without the appened quotations

I2P (Setup):

First we'll download our i2p.jar for our platform (Linux), this may save to Downloads by default, this is good. 

Now we open up terminal and install our "jre-openjdk" (This allows us to install the i2p.jar file we just downloaded)

"sudo pacman -S jre-openjdk"

now we want to go to our Downloads (or wherever you saved the file) and left click our .jar file we downloaded

a gui should now appear in which you can install, all defaults are fine, it should install to I2P in our home directory (example... /home/Your UserHere/i2p)

If you want to do a test run now to make sure i2p works, you can 

cd i2p

./iprouter start

and this should start i2p and often times will open whatever your default browser, but as we established earlier, this browser is not to be used, instead opting for our isolated browser for security. 

inorder to browse sites in i2p we now need to setup what will be our http proxy so we can directly interface with the i2p network (browse sites, etc), to do this we will need our secondary browser

Chromium and Firefox are the common ones, this guide will provide you the chromium command (enter in terminal) in which you will need to be able to proxy, which is....  
as a sidenote, some chromium based browsers may have a proxy settings page in the settings menu, so search if your chromium based browser has a proxy settings page if you want to avoid using the command to launch chromium with a custom proxy
chromium --proxy-server=127.0.0.1:4444

for firefox go to about:preferences#connectionSecurity click on Configure Proxy choose manual proxy configuration. enter 127.0.0.1 as the http proxy and 4444 as the port. save the settings and firefox should be able to access the i2p network

This command should open your web browser and if all is well you will be met with a setup screen where it will ask you configure your share rates for network bandwidth (i2p is a peer 2 peer network), set whatever you feel reasonable and you'll then be greeted with your router home page, where you can do thngs ranging from tunnel config, access the search indexer "notbob.i2p" and other powerful features. 

On the topic of bob, lets see if his address will load when we try to load the page. If it loads, great your tunnels should be configured and your i2p install is good to go. If it fails to load give it a minute or 2 so it can explore the tunnels needed for connection < 3. 

if all else fails then you'll need to refer to the troubleshoot or FaQ guides of I2P as the list of troubleshoot steps can vary from system to system. 

We'll come back to I2P a little later on in the the final portion of this guide where we setup our tunnel via The Hidden Services tab so we can allow our fellow comrades (friends) to join via our .b32 address destination.


Inspircd (Setup)

To keep everything together in one place you'll want to git clone from terminal in your i2p folder. 

cd i2p

git clone https://github.com/inspircd/inspircd

now cd into inspircd

cd inspircd

now we will want to configure this prior to building 

./configure

it will warn you about using a dev build, I'm lazy and ignored the warning, Don't be me ;)

You'll want to go through the prompts, where it lists file directories, you will want to change these to /home/YourUserHere/i2p/inspircd/run/bin (Unless this path is already the default which it may be)

changing the first line with the i2p inspircd directory will update the directories that follow so you can just mash enter on the rest without manual adjustment

Once configured you can now build the application, a useful tag to add when using make is the -j followed by your cpu cores and thread (for 16 core cpus typically you'll have 16 threads alongside the cores == 32 )

make -j32 install

it should now build and install to the i2p/inspircd directory

From here you'll want to 
cd into i2p/inspircd/run/conf/examples

cp inspircd.example.conf to /home/YourUserHere/i2p/inspircd/run/conf/inspircd.conf

then edit that file, or alternatively you can use the file I provide to get a working config in seconds. Add that file to /home/YourUserHere/i2p/inspircd/run/conf

here is what I added to mine (refer to inspircd.conf in the included guide repo for further information). the inspircd documentation provides good insight into the commands you may want to add, but for now a basic config should work. Should be as simple as drag and drop into your conf folder.

one important i2p note for unrealircd/inspircd users: make sure your listen blocks are bound to 127.0.0.1 instead of * so the server is only reachable through the i2p tunnel and not exposed directly to the internet

so from here you will probably want to test whether or not inspircd starts, to do this you will want to cd into the inspircd/run directory

cd /home/YourUserHere/i2p/inspircd/run

./inspircd start

if you see no error output from your terminal, she should be up and running. 

To confirm, I recommend "irssi" and will provide the config file in this repo with the commands on how to connect which I slightly adapted from "cons0le7" on github (https://github.com/cons0le7/irc2p-irssi/tree/main)

Hopefully you can connect and join a room :).

Unrealircd (Setup)

Download unrealircd using the Arch Linux Extra Repository

sudo pacman -S unrealircd

now edit the config file

sudo nano /etc/unrealircd/unrealircd.conf

and copy the unrealircd.conf and enter your cloak keys and passwords. (Coming Soon)

just launch unrealircd from the terminal

I2P Tunnel Configuration: The final Piece Of This Puzzle. 

So you may be thinking, kinda lonely here just me in this chat, no one around, no MeMZ, no Le MEOW ;P. 

If you so happen to have friends that are willing to use I2P and ditch Discord, you can set up the tunnel that will allow them to join your IRC server via your .b32.i2p address. But wait you might ask, how I do find this address, how does one do. It's easy :P 

We will need to return to that I2P router page we briefly explored earlier, from here we want to focus our attention to the left side of the page to a tab called " Hidden Services Manager". From here we add a I2P Hidden Services entry.

Our new Hidden Service is a Standard Service

Our name as follows the inspircd.conf (important that names match if I remember right). 

Tunnel Name: IRC-I2P

Target: 127.0.0.1

Port: 6667

And lastly, make sure SSL is unticked

We can now hit save

And for good measure stop and start this new tunnel just to make sure it initializes

You should now see a destination address underneath the entry we just created, a bunch of random characters then followed by the extension .b32.i2p, well that bunch of random characters then followed by the extension is what your friends use to find your IRC server within the network.

So now, all your friends need to do is access Hidden Services Manager on their I2P instance, scroll all the way down to "New client tunnel", hit create Standard copy  the entry we just created line for line but now they can add that address you were so kind in sharing into the tunnel destination. 

You should wait 2-5 minutes for the tunnels to build, and voila, all your friend now needs to do is use the same steps you made with "irssi" and He/She should be able to chat to you and you can now send funny Ascii art and other MemZ to each other. 

As for performance, there is quite a bit of latency but not unbearable, takes a second or two between each message. But it has the bestest feature of them all, yes this 1988, 2002 hybrid dinosaur tech does what modern companies cannot, there are no logs, zero, nada, once you disconnect and end your chat, there is no recovering that chat history, total peace of mind.

Lastly Here are the sources that helped me to better understand the process, some already linked in this Guide, but here is the short list bundled together 
if you encounter any issues following this guide, please open an issue on the github page or send us an email onto the address linuxlarp@proton.me and we'll do our best to help.

https://github.com/cons0le7/irc2p-irssi/tree/main

https://docs.inspircd.org/4/configuration/

https://hackforums.net/showthread.php?tid=6326813

https://cdn.loveandlemons.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/iced-coffee-recipe.jpg

https://i2p.net/en/docs/guides/browser-config/
